.github/issue_template.md, before:

### Description of the issue:
<!-- Try to be as clear as possible, e.g.
- Is there a functionality missing?
- Did an existing function fail?
- What is the exact error message, and other output that you got?
- What have you tried yourself to fix it? -->

#### Reproducing this issue:
<!-- If applicable, please attach the problematic code. -->
```matlab
INSERT CODE HERE
```

#### System information
* Please report:
1. RAVEN version (stabile [release](https://github.com/SysBioChalmers/RAVEN/releases), `devel` branch?)
2. Operating system (Windows/Mac/Linux; include version)

**I hereby confirm that I have:**
<!-- Note: replace [ ] with [X] to check the box -->
- [ ] Followed the [guidelines](https://github.com/SysBioChalmers/RAVEN/wiki/Installation) to install RAVEN.
- [ ] Checked that a similar issue does not [already exist](https://github.com/SysBioChalmers/RAVEN/issues?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Aissue)
- [ ] If suitable, needed, asked first in the [Gitter chat room](https://gitter.im/SysBioChalmers/RAVEN) about the issue

Commit message:

doc: rename devel to develop

.github/issue_template.md, after:

### Description of the issue:
<!-- Try to be as clear as possible, e.g.
- Is there a functionality missing?
- Did an existing function fail?
- What is the exact error message, and other output that you got?
- What have you tried yourself to fix it? -->

#### Reproducing this issue:
<!-- If applicable, please attach the problematic code. -->
```matlab
INSERT CODE HERE
```

#### System information
<!-- Please report the complete output from checkInstallation, for instance:
 > Installing from location             C:\Work\GitHub\RAVEN
 > Checking RAVEN release               2.7.12
   > You are running the latest RAVEN release
 > Checking MATLAB release              2022a
 > Checking system architecture         win64
 > Set RAVEN in MATLAB path             Pass
 > Save MATLAB path                     Pass

etc. etc.
 -->

**I hereby confirm that I have:**
<!-- Note: replace [ ] with [X] to check the box -->
- [ ] Checked that a similar issue does not [already exist](https://github.com/SysBioChalmers/RAVEN/issues?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Aissue)
